So in my last video we had a look at phenolic PCBs
and how bad they are at resisting moisture and
high temperatures when reflowing, if you haven't
seen that video I'll leave it in a card here.
But what about FR-4 PCBs that we're probably
more familiar with if you've ordered them
from the various online manufacturers you
might have received them packed in this
sealed packaging with a silica gel so this would
lead you to believe that these are actually
quite moisture sensitive, but in that video I did
say that FR-4 PCBs are pretty much better in every
single way both in temperature resistance and
moisture sensitivity so I thought I'd make thisvideo and put that to the test.
So here I have a
FR-4 PCB from a online PCB manufacturer and we're
going to be putting it to the test at 300 °C
and see how it holds up against the phenolic PCB.
So having a look at the aftermath
it's pretty difficult to see but
there is some slight discoloration, you
can see some of the pads are oxidized.
To make it easier to see I've
upped the contrast in this frame,
so you can really see the dark area is the
area that's been discolored by the hightemperature,
but it's it's only very minor in
comparison to the phenolic PCB.
So seeing as 300 °C didn't do it let's try 500 °C and
that's the highest my little heat gun can go.
And as we see it pretty
quickly starts to degrade
and discolor, I'm not quite sure
what this would be referred to as.
So jabbing tweezers into it we can see it's
pretty much lost all it's structural integrity and
we can see a lot of the fibers in the fiberglass
are just pulling apart and these tracks aren't
held on anymore at all so pretty much if you're
if your PCB gets to 500 °C you're screwed
but at that point you've got bigger problems. So
looking at it we can actually see the actual
fiberglass weave under all of this burnt epoxy
and here we have the individual fiberglass strands
interestingly the epoxy is completely gone you
can see the individual strands there's no epoxy
holding it together anymore it's all burnt away.
Sowe had a look at both 300 °C and 500 °C
and in both cases there wasn't any damage due
to moisture like we saw on the phenolic PCB
so here I have soaked this FR-4 PCB in water so we
should be able to get some pretty good action here
now looking at the side of the PCB you can
see just how far the water has wicked up
now this PCB has been in here for about
a week so it's pretty much soaked full of water.
So here I've got it set to
350 °C just so that
we can definitely see some action
from this PCB and if we look at it.
It's all going nice and then suddenly it oh yeah
it just completely delaminates and forms this
massive bubble and we can see that the epoxy
is starting to burn as well because we're atsuch a high temperature.
Now trying it again
on the other side but this time with a normal
temperature of 260 °C we can see
that it's resisting it a fair bit more
but here we have exactly the same problem of
the layers delaminating and it forming a nice...
well a terrible bubble in this case we
definitely never want to see this but
this is exactly what I want to see because it
proves the point that they are moisture sensitive
but nowhere near as bad as phenolic PCBs and if
I take my tweezers just to show you that
this bubble is certainly pressurized with
some sort of gas presumably water vapor.
So I've let it cool down now and you can see the
outline of where that bubble was and the where the
layers have delaminated so yeah all this
area here is where it stopped interestingly thevias,
interestingly here the vias appear
to have actually stopped the delamination
which is rather interesting it might be a good
little trick to use vias to hold the layerstogether better
I know that you can often use
vias to ensure pads adhere better to the PCB sothey don't fall off.
So I'm very interested to
see just what's underneath this bubble so
we're going to do a destructive teardown and
have a look at the individual layers so I'm
just going to cut it here with this X-ACTO knife,
be careful with an X-ACTO knife if you do this
and now that we've cut the top copper layer
we can just pry it up just like that and we
can see that we've just took the top copper
layer off it's delaminated from the fiberglass.
Interestingly we can see the pattern of the
epoxy on the copper so it looks like when we
peeled up the copper actually took the epoxy with
it although on the edge it didn't and this layer
of fiberglass is still quite loose so I'm going to
cut away further at this to see if we can expose
the lower layers so cutting it with that X-ACTO
knife again and see here I can actually put the
X-ACTO knife in underneath that fiberglass layer
so again this layer here is completely delaminated
and yeah I can just pull this up with some
tweezers it's rather rigid but yeah it's
done a fair bit of damage to this although
interestingly this tab hasn't delaminated as
much as the other one so I'm not sure if that
top layer delaminating was just a result of me
so yeah just jamming the tweezers in and
pulling it up works pretty good
Now just toprove to you that this isn't just a result of
cutting a normal FR-4 PCB that if you cut it it
falls apart like this so I'll just cut it over
here where I didn't apply the high temperature
and as you can see if I cut it, it doesn't
fall apart at all it's held together quite well
yeah I try to get the knife in here but it's just,
it's not going to come up there's no delamination
it's all held together quite well without epoxy.
So taking a closer look at the macro lens we canreally see that the copper has pulled up the epoxywith it, so I'm not sure if this was part of the
delamination from the gases because the other
flaps appeared to still be adhered quite well but
in the case of all four flaps the first fiberglass
layer is definitely completely delaminated from
the second fiberglass layer, here you can see
the difference between where the epoxy has
been pulled up by the copper and where it stops
and the epoxy is still adhered to the fiberglass.
So I've now pulled back the top copper as well
as the first fiberglass layer a lot more and
we can see actually that the second fiberglass
layer does actually have an air bubble behind it
we can see here the extremity of the bubble
here and we can see that this area here is
is still adhered together and hasn't delaminated
so i suspect that these lower layers were probably
delaminated by the high temperature on the
other side. In hindsight i probably should
have just gotten another PCB and done a second
test with that without doing it on the other side
but I couldn't be bothered to put another one
of these in a glass of water for a week and letit do its thing.
So here we can really see that
this first layer is completely delaminated and
you can really see that there's quite a definite
position of where it's delaminated and you can
see that this top layer is actually a smaller
area than the second layer's delamination so
yeah I'm pretty sure that second layer is because
of the damage from the first test and we can see
here that the surface is very smooth for
where the copper has been pulled off the
epoxy that covers the fiberglass and here's just a
close-up image of that and here's another close-up
you can see here to the left the epoxy still has
the texture from the other layer of fiberglass
in it and this bit here still has the top copper
and the first layer of fiberglass but where I've
ripped it you can see that every second strand
is sticking out which is rather interesting way
how it tore and here's another close-up of
where I've ripped off the top fiberglass layer.
These are pieces of fiberglass unlike
the first high temperature test where the
epoxy was actually burnt and was degraded
these still have the epoxy in them so
if I poke and prod them with an implement you
can see that they're still completely rigid
unlike before where you could see the individual
fibers that just splayed apart.
So that's itfor this video so I hope you've learned
something and as always thanks for watching